# Parallelization of DARP using Tabu Search for multi-cpu

## Abstract

Dial A Ride (DAR) is a transportation system to manage transportation demands in a bounded geographic area using a fleet of vehicles. It can be defined as set of customers requesting transporation service with a set of constraints like pickup/dropoff locations and time-windows. Thus, Dial-A-Ride problem (DARP) can be defined as generating a schedule of routes for vehicles in DAR such that it is optimized for various parameters, such as cost of service, quality of service, service in defined time windows and so on. The DARP can be useful for many real-world use cases such as community transport planning, para-transportation and meeting transporation needs where the population is sparse or weak. It is proved to be NP-Hard and thus very computationally intensive. Therefore it requires a lot of computational power to solve at scale. Many exact solutions have been proposed in the past, but none of them have viable execution time for real-world scale. Current state of art of solutions are using meta-heuristics such as tabu search, variable neighbood search, deterministic annealing, multi-atomic annealing. GPUs and computing clusters are also employed to take advantage of High Performance computing. While GPUs offer great computing power, they can be quite expensive and require low-level program and architecture specific optimizations. Massive parallel machines are not easy to access and configure so that they are not viable for wide adoption either.

This paper takes a rather practical approach of using highly available and less expensive multi-core CPU machines to solve DARP. The rationale behind using multi-core CPU machines is that, they have now become common in everyday machines, they are less expensive, easy to get hands on, and does not require low level program and architecture specific optimization, thanks to modern compilers. This paper uses Granular Tabu Search algorithm proposed for GPU. Unlike traditional tabu search algorithms, this paper uses a method of large random solutions to generate a initial solution. The algorithm discussed in this paper is implemented in Julia and benchmarking is done on various configuration of DARP dataset on different thread configurations using local and cloud machines with high number of CPU cores. 

## Introduction

Dial-A-Ride Problem (DARP) deals with moving passengers from one location to another with a fixed set of vehicles with fixed capacity constraint on each vehicle. The customers/passengers submit the requests with pickup/dropoff locations along with pickup/dropoff time windows, max ride time. The objective of DARP is to provide service to passenger under constraints defined in the system while optimization for the objective function of the system. The optimization function for the DAR used in the system is defined as combination of various factors where it is possible to optimize for a subset by modifing the constant coefficients for each or subset of factors. A DAR where all the requests and constraints of the DAR are known in advance is classified as Static DAR. If the requests are allowed to arrive while the service is active, such DAR is classified as Dynamic DAR. This paper deals with Static DAR, so the all requests and constraints of the system are known in advance. The DAR system is flexible is flexible in its definition that it's optimization function can be modified to optimize for a specific factor or subset of factors such as ride time of passenger, quality of service, operational costs, total travel time to name a few. In the DAR system used for this paper, we use a optimization function that uses constant coefficient values applied to certain voilations allowing us to tune the function as required. The less the value of the optimization function, the much better the sysytem is optimized. The DAR also has a single depot, where are the route start and end, that is all the vehicles routes should start and end at this depot. DARP is proved to be NP-Hard, it is generalized from the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time windows (PDPTW).




